---
layout: post
title: a dev post about uncertainty
date: 2026-03-09 00:00:00
description: SegWithU dev post
tags: university
categories: work
featured: false
citation: false
---

# SegWithU Dev Post

Before we start, let me make it clear: **we are talking about uncertainty in the context of Bayesian statistics**, not
the traditional definition in the information theory literature.

## How Do Deep Ensembles Work?

Deep ensembles are the current gold standard for uncertainty estimation as an alternative to Bayesian NNs. Therefore,
it is important to understand how they work before we jump into innovation.

If we model deep neural networks as efficient compressions of the training data, which they indeed are, deep ensembles
are essentially measuring the difference between partial manifolds of the entire training set.

But how do we measure that difference? Let's understand the conceptual workflow before we dive into the complex maths.

### Intuition

Each ensemble member is a compression of a different part of the training set. They differ in:

- initializations
- optimization paths
- augmentation trajectories

Because neural networks are underdetermined, many compressions fit the training data similarly well but encode somewhat
different decision boundaries. Polynomial interpolation is a good example to understand this (retake your linear algebra
course if you don't know what that is).

Now let's consider an input $x$.

#### Case 1: Compressions Agree

If all models produce similar probability distributions $p_m(y|x)$, it means:

- the dataset constrained this prediction well
- the feature-pattern at $x$ is well-supported by training data

which concludes that the epistemic uncertainty is low.

In this case, the mutual information given by

$$
H[\bar{p}]-\frac{1}{M}\sum H[p_m]\approx0
$$

is small.

#### Case 2: Compressions Disagree

If different models give different class probabilities, then the training data did not determine a unique predictive
rule there. In details, it means:

- this input $x$ lies in a region where the data compression is unstable
- different valid summaries of the data extrapolate differently

Then $H[\bar{p}]$ is large while the average member entropy may stay moderate or low. Thus, the gap, which is the mutual
information, given by the following equation becomes large.

$$
H[\bar{p}]-\frac{1}{M}\sum H[p_m]
$$

#### Example: Polynomial Regression

I always like to use polynomial regression as an example to illustrate how neural networks work in principle as it can
be drawn on a plane and is deterministic.

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="/assets/img/2026-03-09-swu/polynomial-regression.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
